Project assignments (#27)
merely-useful/r-rse: appendices/assignments.md

# Course Assignments

<!-- Perspective for this section would be on the student, but the instructor
section would be of course on the instructor. Or should this be entirely 

> targeted to the instructor? -->

Reviewer: Agree, written for the learner in this section is good. I also like making it more explicit as you suggest.

> targeted to the instructor? -->

Author: I really like this idea! Ok, I will modify.

This course is designed around completing at least two project assignments.
You would largely work on these assignments outside of class time.
Each project assignment has several milestones you would need to complete
throughout the course, usually due shortly after encountering them during
the course. The project assignments are to:

> 1. Create a small and simple package that you would complete on your own.

Reviewer: I like option 1 of your suggestions, @cwickham.

> 2. Make small and simple improvements to existing packages on GitHub that you
> would complete on your own.

Reviewer: I like @cwickham's suggestion and I think we can also get rid of the "would complete on your own" bit. 

```suggestion
2. Make small and simple improvements to a package on GitHub.
```

3. Create a slightly larger, team-based package that you would complete in a
group of 2-3 other learners. This last assignment is optional and depends on
the specific context of the course.

Each project assignment is described in more detail below.

## First project: Create a package on your own

The first assignment is to create a small, simple package. The *learning

> objective* for this project is that you would practice and reinforce the skills 
> and knowledge you've learned during the course and to start building your

Reviewer: Small rewording for sentence flow

```suggestion
objective* for this project is to practice and reinforce the skills 
and knowledge you've learned during the course and to start building your
```

- A unit test for each function.
- Roxygen documentation for each function.
- A README with enough detail to know what the package aims to do, a simple
example for how to use it, how to install it, and how to contribute.
- A CONTRIBUTING guidelines and a Code of Conduct.
- Has a passing R CMD check on the Continuous Integration service (in this case
GitHub Actions).

The instructor will decide the exact details of what is required to complete this
assignment and what topic or problems the package should focus on.
For those who are doing this course on their own, the assignment is to create a
package that should creates some custom summaries of the climate, either local,
regional, national, or global. These summaries could include minimum and maximum
historical temperatures, how many days of rainy or cloudy days, or rainfall.
You can decide on which location to choose, but we recommend creating something
for your own city or region. Climate data is available from at the
[World Weather Information Service](https://worldweather.wmo.int/en/dataguide.html)
website.

For an example of what this might look like, see 
TODO: Add the repo of the example climate package.

> ## Second project: Each learner contributing to an existing package

Reviewer 2: To match first heading
```suggestion
## Second project: Contributing to an existing package on your own
```

Individual-based, small improvements to existing package: Used as second 
deliverable, due after "Community involvement". Should only build off of
and improve an existing package, so doesn't need many milestones. Used to
reinforce importance of having documentation that can involve the community.
Could be the final exercises of chapters between Build Management and 

> Community Involvement.

Reviewer: This reads like a note to self, as opposed to the first section which was instructions for a learner. Will this be revised later or should we polish it a bit now? If now, it should be formatted more like the section starting at line 36.

1. Choose a package to improve by either:
    1. Selecting one from the list of packages provided by the instructor.
    2. Selecting one based on a search of GitHub, based on the search

>     instructions provided by the instructor.

Author: Like make another section for "self-directed learners"? Or include a call out box targeted to self-directed learners? Or another list item?

>     instructions provided by the instructor.

Reviewer 3: I've been thinking while reading this that I would be discouraged if I were reading the book on my own (not part of a course). I would support adding a section for "self-directed learners".

2. Improve the package to better fit with best practices based on what you've learned.
    - You don't need to update everything in the package, only what you can and
    what you've learned so far.
    - You can optionally submit a Pull Request of the changes, but this depends
    on whether the maintainer is open to Pull Requests. If you want to submit a
    Pull Request, check if an issue already exists for improving something
    and comment in the Issue that you will try to address the issue in a Pull
    Request. Otherwise, open a new Issue and ask if the maintainer would be open
    to Pull Requests.

> ## Third project: Each group creating a package

Reviewer 2: Matching other headings
```suggestion
## Third project: Creating a package as a team
```

This assignment is *optional* as it depends on multiple factors like class size,
duration of course, or virtual vs in-person. This would be the third and final 
deliverable for the learners. There are no final exercises in each chapter that
learners need to complete related to this assignment. Exercises and the
structure of the group work would be determined by the instructor.
This assignment would best be due sometime after the teamwork lesson (REF).

- Using the same process as was done with the first project assignment,
complete a package as a team, using the tools taught in the team and community
chapters (TODO: REF).

## Rubric and expectations of the learner

> TODO: Can fill this out more as we work on book

Reviewer 2: Yeah, sounds good. As an instructor, I'd love having a rubric that I could use/adapt.

The expectations for completing the project assignments change as the course 
progresses.

- After the first Git lesson (REF), project should have frequent and consistent
commits and, after the GitHub lesson (REF), pushes to GitHub.
The GitHub history will be checked to confirm this happens.
- Tasks in the final chapter exercises should be completed shortly after
finishing the chapter.

## For instructors (add once file is merged)

Making an interesting project assignment can be quite difficult, so this section

> gives some suggestions and guidance on how what the specific project should be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gives some suggestions and guidance on what the specific project assignment should be.
```

The specific type and number of assignments are of course ultimately decided by

> the instructor of the course, but at the least, this course is designed to with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the instructor of the course, but at the least, this course is designed with
```

two main project assignments in mind, as described above. The specific details of
the assignments are completed by the instructor, however, this section contains
some general advice and guidelines.

- The first project package description already provides a suggested package to
create. As the instructor you can modify this example to focus on weather
from a specific city, a specific time period, or different aspects of the weather
(e.g. temperature only).
- While the project package does not necessarily need to involve data, it might
be more motivating for the learners to work on if the project did include data of 

> some time. R is a language predominantly used by researchers and data scientists

Reviewer: I can't tell if this is a typo, but maybe it should be "some kind" instead?
```suggestion
some kind. R is a language predominantly used by researchers and data scientists
```

for doing data analysis, visualization, and related reporting. Given this,
learners taking this course are probably already familiar with these tasks and
would benefit more from the course if they see and use an application they are
familiar with.
    - If it doesn't involve data, it's still recommended to structure the project

>     package around using or working with data in some way.

Reviewer: What does this mean? Doesn't "using or working with data" mean that it DOES involve data still?

Author: Hmm, good point. I guess I was thinking e.g. an API that interacts with a website that has data, but don't actually do any work directly on the data, if that makes sense. Given R's focus on data, I don't think we should recommend straying too far from that.

> - The first project package description already provides a suggested package to
> create. As the instructor you can modify this example to focus on weather
> from a specific city, a specific time period, or different aspects of the weather
> (e.g. temperature only).
> - While the project package does not necessarily need to involve data, it might
> be more motivating for the learners to work on if the project did include data of 
> some time. R is a language predominantly used by researchers and data scientists
> for doing data analysis, visualization, and related reporting. Given this,
> learners taking this course are probably already familiar with these tasks and
> would benefit more from the course if they see and use an application they are
> familiar with.
>     - If it doesn't involve data, it's still recommended to structure the project
>     package around using or working with data in some way.
> - Package problems are always better if they are targeted to the background 
> knowledge of the instructor and the learners. Field-specific and class
> context-dependent problems will more likely be remembers and learned than other
> problems.

Reviewer 2: A re-ordering and some minor wording edits:
```suggestion
- Package problems are always better if they are targeted to the background 
knowledge of the instructor and the learners. Field-specific and class
context-dependent problems will more likely be remembered and learned than other
problems.
- In the final exercises, we provide a suggested suggested package - 
weather summaries, as described above. 
As the instructor, one way to tailor your class, 
is to modify this example to focus on weather from a local city, 
a specific time period, or different aspects of the weather (e.g. temperature only).
- While the project package does not necessarily need to involve data, it might
be more motivating for the learners to work on if the project does include data. 
R is a language predominantly used by researchers and data scientists
for doing data analysis, visualization, and related reporting. Given this,
learners taking this course are probably already familiar with these tasks and
would benefit more from the course if they see and use an application they are
familiar with.
    - If it doesn't involve data, it's still recommended to structure the project
    package around using or working with data in some way.

```

TODO: Add some examples that instructors can based off of and deviate if needed.

Here are some example datasets that could form the basis for the project packages:

- [NYC Dog Licensing dataset](https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Health/NYC-Dog-Licensing-Dataset/nu7n-tubp)
- [Statistics Canada](https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/type/data)
- The openly licensed [Airbnb data](http://insideairbnb.com/get-the-data.html)
- [Atmospheric CO~2~](https://scrippsco2.ucsd.edu/data/atmospheric_co2/index.html)

- [fivethirty eight article about visits to national parks](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-national-parks-have-never-been-more-popular/).  A package might include the data (which is a bit painful to get from the NPS), plus a 

- (For advanced users) [Denmark Statistics](https://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1920) 
(through the R package [dkstat](https://github.com/rOpenGov/dkstat) or the 
[StatBank API](https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/brug-statistikken/muligheder-i-statistikbanken/api))

Other potential examples to use for non-dataset-based project packages include:

> - A simple package for working with missing values. Some function within it could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A simple package for working with missing values. Functions within it could
```

include simpler versions of other functions like `naniar::count_missing()`,
`tidyr::replace_na()`, or `dplyr::na_if()`. The data to work with could be
anything that has missing values (or should have missing values), primarily to use
as a way to build and demonstrate the functions.

> - Simple simulations like in [Nature of Code](https://natureofcode.com/). The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Simple simulations like cellular automata in [Nature of Code](https://natureofcode.com/). The
```

package might have a function for plotting a vector of zeros and one, functions
for evolving such a vector, and functions that the control evolution.

- (Advanced users) A package for "branded" analysis, for instance where the data
might be corporate/team/school colors and functions that might include a custom
ggplot2 theme for them.

### Second assignment

The learners should either be given a list of some potential packages to improve
or be given detailed instructions on how to find potential packages. If you want
to provide a list of possible packages, here is some instructions on how to find
these packages to give the learners:

TODO: Include instructions here, eg what search terms to use in GitHub etc and how to find packages.
TODO: Include some example packages to try to base off of.

### Third assignment

The specific problem or package that groups will create depends heavily on their
background knowledge and skills, as well as that of the instructor. To make the 
most of learning and progress, groups should preferably be given a set of pre-existing

> problems that a package could solve. This problem can already be a solved problem;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
problems that a package could solve. This problem can be an already-solved problem;
```

the specific context of the course.

Each project assignment is described in more detail below.

## First project: Create a package on your own

The first assignment is to create a small, simple package. The *learning
objective* for this project is to practice and reinforce the skills 
and knowledge you've learned during the course and to start building your
confidence in package development that will help for the later assignments.

<!--
NOTE: I moved this due date to after chapter 13 rather than chapter 7, since
we could keep writing the final exercises to keep building up this package.
Plus, for those learners who will use this on their own, this would be nice to
keep going with.
-->

The project assignment is recommended to be **due** immediately after the
Package Release lesson (Chapter \@ref(package-release)). At the end of each
chapter there is a final exercise that gives you tasks to do that guide you in
completing this first project assignment. These final exercises are used as 
milestones to ensure you are making progress on your assignment.

An *acceptable* package for completing the assignment would have at a *minimum*:

- Two-three functions.

> - (Optional) a dataset with associated roxygen documentation and an R script that

Reviewer 3: Given the intro to these requirements states these are a _minimum_, should we split out the things that are optional? Are there other things that could be listed as optional?

generated or extracted the dataset.
- A unit test for each function.
- Roxygen documentation for each function.
- A README with enough detail to know what the package aims to do, a simple

> example for how to use it, how to install it, and how to contribute.

Reviewer 3: Are these contribution instructions different from what's included in CONTRIBUTING in the line below?

> - CONTRIBUTING guidelines and a Code of Conduct.

Reviewer 3: another boilerplate doc is LICENSE, should we include?

and knowledge you've learned during the course and to start building your
confidence in package development that will help for the later assignments.

The project assignment is recommended to be **due** immediately after the
Package Release lesson (Chapter \@ref(package-release)). At the end of each
chapter there is a final exercise that gives you tasks to do that guide you in
completing this first project assignment. These final exercises are used as 
milestones to ensure you are making progress on your assignment.

An *acceptable* package for completing the assignment would have at a *minimum*:

- Two-three functions.
- (Optional) a dataset with associated roxygen documentation and an R script that
generated or extracted the dataset.
- A unit test for each function.
- Roxygen documentation for each function.
- A README with enough detail to know what the package aims to do, a simple
example for how to use it, how to install it, and a link to how to contribute.
- CONTRIBUTING guidelines, a License, and a Code of Conduct.
- Has a passing R CMD check on the Continuous Integration service (in this case
GitHub Actions).

> TODO: Add some optional things to add to the package, for those keen on doing it.

Reviewer 4: Should we add those now? 

I would suggest things like pkgdown and r-hub which are already going to be part of the book.

Author: Good idea! Added some to list.

Other potential examples to use for non-dataset-based project packages include:

- A simple package for working with missing values. Functions within it could
include simpler versions of other functions like `naniar::count_missing()`,
`tidyr::replace_na()`, or `dplyr::na_if()`. The data to work with could be
anything that has missing values (or should have missing values), primarily to use
as a way to build and demonstrate the functions.

- Simple simulations like cellular automata in [Nature of Code](https://natureofcode.com/). The
package might have a function for plotting a vector of zeros and one, functions
for evolving such a vector, and functions that the control evolution.

- (Advanced users) A package for "branded" analysis, for instance where the data
might be corporate/team/school colors and functions that might include a custom
ggplot2 theme for them.

### Second assignment

The learners should either be given a list of some potential packages to improve
or be given detailed instructions on how to find potential packages. If you want
to provide a list of possible packages, here is some instructions on how to find
these packages to give the learners:

> TODO: Include instructions here, eg what search terms to use in GitHub etc and how to find packages.

Reviewer 4: Would also add CRAN Views as a place to search for packages given that it categorizes them by domain

Author: Done.
